🌟 Work at RoadFlex
Thanks for your interest in a career at RoadFlex! We’ve shared a bit about our company and who we’re looking for below - if we sound like a team you want to be a part of, please check out our open positions and apply ASAP. There are lots of people out there who need what we’re building - help us help them!


Who We Are
RoadFlex’s mission is to modernize financial services for the underserved trucking and logistics industries. These industries provide the backbone of the US economy. However, the financial infrastructure on which they run is broken. These are underserved industries where the existing financial and payment tools are difficult to use, outdated and saddled with shady fee structures.


We are changing that. RoadFlex believes that the hardworking men and women in this sector deserve better. With RoadFlex, customers can rely on the timely movement of capital for our supply chains to function efficiently. We build financial tools and payment products for truckers and fleet managers. We offer them world-class customer service that work with and around the unique constraints of their daily lives. If you would like to join our mission of helping the people manning the backbone of the US economy, let’s talk!


We’re a small team looking for passionate, execution-focused, self-starters to help us build the modern payments infrastructure for trucking and logistics. We are backed by several top tier VCs and with participation by many successful entrepreneurs and CEOs of top tech companies such as Pipe, Hippo, Digits, Product Hunt, Clearbit, Flexe, among others. We are going into hyper-growth mode and growing our team to meet the demand.


RoadFlex is still in stealth mode. It was founded by serial entrepreneurs who previously founded venture-backed companies, including a drone analytics company and a crypto infrastructure startup. The founding team brings the expertise required to make RoadFlex a reality, both in the logistics/trucking sector as well as the payments/finance industry. 


Who We Are Looking For
TL&DR - RoadFlex is not a good fit for everyone, and that’s OK. We want people who aren’t just interested in working at a startup; we want people who are excited about building a great company. We are a team of serial entrepreneurs. In addition to function-specific skills, here are some traits that enable our team members to thrive:


* Ego-less Learner -- Everyday at RoadFlex, we are trying things that we’ve never done before - sometimes they work; sometimes they don’t. To be successful here, you need to embrace that feeling of ‘being a beginner’ and be willing to accept feedback in stride. 
* Less Talk; More Action -- Everyone rolls up our sleeves at RoadFlex. If your strength is being the ‘idea gal or guy’ but you don’t create your own slides or write your own code, then we are not a great fit.  
* Prioritize ruthlessly - Our view is that being a 10x engineer is not about writing more code; it’s about making the right decision on what to build. We’re hiring for people who can make the right strategic decisions on where to spend their time:
  



We’re also inspired by the culture work done at other companies and plan to develop our own playbook here too. Some of the concepts that resonate most with us are the importance of stunning colleagues.


If you like the sound of our environment and you’re passionate about joining a team like the one we’ve described, we’d love for you to apply for a role so we can get to know you better.




Open Positions


Below are the positions we’re currently focused on. 


Head of Capital Markets


Product Lead


Business Operations Lead


Talent Manager


Risk Lead


Customer Success Manager


Growth Marketing Lead


Engineering Lead


Senior Full-Stack Engineer


Senior Back-End Engineer


Sales Development Representative


Customer Support Lead