systematicawesome.jacobcole.net > products.jacobcole.net
Started by jacobcole4000@gmail.com
Quality Products
“Have only things that are essential and exquisite” ~Mom.  High quality products 


#curatedlist #connectordoc


See Also: thoughtfulweb.jacobcole.net • foodslist.jacobcole.net • burningman.jacobcole.net • toolstacks.jacobcole.net




Table of Contents:
Products
Artful
Useful
Foods
Reference Lists


Products


Artful
Paperblanks Store Azure Mini Lined Journal – "The 1688 binding of L'office de la Semaine Sainte, detailing the rites of the Christian Holy Week, was adorned by a handtooled pattern edged in gilt."




Useful
Exped sleeping pad #Sleep


Headlamp
Black Diamond Equipment Cosmo 350 Headlamp, Graphite - Has 2 Buttons, so easier to remember which is power 


Sleep Masks
* WAOAW Sleep Mask


Blue Blocker Glasses
* Uvex Ultra-Spec 2000 Blue Light Blocking Computer Glasses with SCT-Orange Lens (S0360X) – Works over glasses and better for blue blocking
Noise-canceling Bluetooth Earbuds
* Baseus AirNora 2 TWS Bluetooth Earbuds - “Random product rec: these baseus earbuds slap. Good sound, great ANC, spatial audio sounds good too for like $50” -@br__ian
Water Bottles
* Coleman autoseal insulated water bottle -- never spill water on your computer again! After spending $500 on a laptop repair due to spilling water on my laptop, I found this water bottle. It’s convenient to drink from with the push-button and I never spill again. Only thing to be mindful of is making sure the lid is screwed on tight, and I’ve almost never forgotten to do this. Bonus points for being insulated to e.g. keep water cool in a hot car for hours!
Merino Wool
* Darn tough socks -- re-wear your socks and they don’t smell or generate bacteria! Unlike most merino wool products, these socks are reinforced in several layers, making them last through a lot of wear and tear. Little to complain about here, gold star product. Total biology/clothing/productivity hack.
* Smartwool underwear -- like darn tough socks, allow you to rewear underwear for up to a week straight
Sleeping pads
* Exped MegaMat -- one of the best inflatable sleeping pads out there. Slightly pricy at ~$200 but one of the best investments you can make in portable sleep gear. Extremely comfortable (eg. for car camping) and many get better sleep than they get on their bed at home.
Belts
* This Columbia web belt -- has a ratchet strap so it’s basically completely customizable in size. As well as being sleek and minimalist and dirt cheap. Uber-functional, stylish, cheap. Yay! Coming from a more traditional belt I was stuck between comfortable hole sizing, but it’s so nice that my belt is now basically a waistband.
Suitcase SAMSONITE SILHOUETTE 17 Carry-on(maybe you need the other version for some international carryon)
#todo light box, dawn simulator, Simon Berens ultra bright indoor lamp
Phillips Hue Bulbs in room changing color in evening to wind down before bed #lifehack


Water Filter
* Culligan
* Alkalizing: AlkaViva H2 series


Yoga
have yoga blocks all around so you can prop your elbows up on them while using your cell phone #lifehack #ergonomics
Manduka PRO Lite Yoga Mat – Lightweight Multipurpose Exercise Mat for Yoga
Sercal.com SW200 Heavy Weight Falza Blanket Heavy weight Mexican falza blanket. Great for Yoga. Measures 78" x 54", weighs 3.1 lbs and made of an acrylic cotton polyester blend. #yogablankets
Are you ordering more blankets for yourself? Falza or fish are both OK. The blankets at Yoga Del Mar are also OK, but I don’t know the name (might be Falza with a different pattern). I don’t like the busy pattern on the Falza’s you have, but I like their dimensions slightly better than the fish. The fish are a bit firmer, and I like that better. Be careful to get the right size of fish blankets, not the small ones. I don’t know the dimensions, but you can measure them if you have a full-sizes fish blanket.


 




Foods
Great Food Products (from  foodslist.jacobcole.net) 
How to Buy Quality Extra Virgin Olive Oil


Tech / Startup Tools
toolstacks.jacobcole.net 


Vitamins & Supplements
https://supplements.jacobcole.net/ 
Burning Man
Tent Fan – Good For Burning Man 
https://burningman.jacobcole.net/ -- see my full burning man pack list from 2023


Reference Lists