systematicawesome.jacobcole.net > visioncharter.world (Visioncharter.j)
• started by jacob@ideaflow.io
        `                     #connectordoc     


Vision Charter 
Database of people’s visions for the world. “We need to look at where we actually want to go, not just where we are afraid we might end up.” ~Douglas Adams[1]
See also: Manifestos.world 


Table of Contents
Visions
Related
Visions
#book "the Haldeman book that really made an impression on me was Forever Peace, a “spiritual sequel” that he wrote twenty years later that seemed to be accurately and presciently capture the zeitgeist of the coming new millennium. Forever Peace isn’t a great novel, in a lot of ways. It’s kind of a mess, with way too much going on. But it’s a fascinating exploration of war and peace and America from someone who spent his whole life studying that, and I think it deserves to be better known. April | 2024 | Goldwag's Journal on Civilization" — https://nathangoldwag.wordpress.com/2024/04/ #vision
More on Forever Peace
It’s 2043, and America–and most of the First World–has reached a level of post-scarcity subsistence, fueled by the development of fusion power and “nanoforges” that can manufacture almost anything imaginable. But everything has a cost. The resources to fuel this economic miracle are wrenched from the Global South, and for years now, America and its allies have been locked in an endless, grinding counterinsurgency across Africa, Latin America, and Southeast Asians. For most Americans, the “Ngumi War” is an abstraction, fought primarily by drones, and broadcast nightly as entertainment. For Julian Class, it’s an unending nightmare. But what can an ordinary man do about it? Nothing, so he thinks, until a series of discoveries forces him to reevaluate everything he thought he knew about the world, and tests just how much he’d be willing to pay for peace.


Visions Continued:




In a Better World… ~Alicia Combs




What would happen if superintelligent AI was aligned with your values?  ~Kat Woods


San Francisco, 2030 ~Tom Schulz


How few people could be working to get everyone’s needs met? Video: Stanford Talk
* Transition state, work could be less of the day, volunteerism collectives more


WIP: Make SF Awesome
* Keep the Center SF Alive and expand


WIP: Make San Diego Awesome
* Bring back Souplantation


Get everyone taken care of! Advocates for Everyone’s Well-being Vision 
* Healing Arts Equal Access Grant and Extensions (brainstorm): 
* Future ideas: float tank access grant, "help me organize my life" volunteer or paid consultant request, mediation request, coaching request, lifestyle change consulting request, "Live with me for a week and absorb my life patterns", borrow a mom/grandma, help me get my tech life together volunteer team, helping gifted people with long term mental health breakdowns, helping spiritually gifted people with major psychological problems/addictions (retreat center underway), helping people recover from  awakenings gone wrong or other inexplicable symptoms, MS, CFS, ADHD consulting, psychedelic therapy grant,  integrative health guidance pro bono services (e.g. refer cancer patients to complementary therapies such as Zhineng Qigong retreats in person or online, some free, to help with side effects of chemotherapy), existential crisis and life guidance support group. 
Float tank access grant, "help me organize my life" volunteer or paid consultant request, mediation request, coaching request, lifestyle change consulting request, "Live with me for a week and absorb my life patterns", borrow a mom/grandma, help me get my tech life together volunteer team, helping gifted people with long term mental health breakdowns, helping spiritually gifted people with major psychological problems/addictions (retreat center underway), helping people recover from awakenings gone wrong or other inexplicable symptoms, MS, CFS, ADHD consulting, psychedelic therapy grant,  integrative health guidance pro bono services (e.g. refer cancer patients to complementary therapies such as Zhineng Qigong retreats in person or online, some free, to help with side effects of chemotherapy), existential crisis and life guidance support group. 
Future Goal 2: Get as many people as possible to have an experience touching the profound state of consciousness that leads to a self sustaining cascade of wisdom and joy. For me some of the easiest onramps have been craniosacral therapy, osteopathic manipulation, qigong (embrace the tree, box holding, and more), Iyengar yoga, deep tissue massage. I'd like to make these onramps more accessible, promoted, and make easy grants for them. Comment with some of yours? 
Meta comment: I believe grants like this can address huge inefficiencies (from people operating in pain or at subpar wellbeing) and in some cases could even become micro loans.
   * See also:  favorverse.jacobcole.net • volunteerforce.jacobcole.net


Microgrants
   * Little grants to pay high schoolers for web hosting, Adobe software, etc.
   * Healing Arts Equal Access Grant


Quests.World: World Quest Guild (See Jack Park’s vision for building Humanity 3.0, especially)
   * Key Quotes from Jack’s inspiring talk
 
What I would do if I were Mark Zuckerberg
   * Ideapad of suggestions for Mark Zuckerberg


What I would do if I were Elon Musk?


WIP Make the World Suggestable – Suggestion Boxes for the World


Humanity Basic Infrastructure Project


Futuregaza.world (WIP)


Make the world more like burning man (WIP)


Globalyogivillage.com (WIP) (direct link)


The Arkhive
Related
Pureland.jacobcole.net • hackathonprojects.jacobcole.net • ideabank.global
Manifestos.world


________________
[1] I can’t find the source on this